<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Trachiniae</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-trachiniae" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is an old-world saying current still,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Of no man canst thou judge the destiny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To call it good or evil, till he die.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I, before I pass into the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of shadows, know <em>my</em> lot is hard and sad.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en in my childhood’s home, while yet I dwelt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At Pleuron with my father, I had dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of marriage more than any Aetolian maid;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For my first wooer was a river god,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Acheloiis, who in triple form appeared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sue my father Oeneus for my hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now as a bull, now as a sinuous snake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With glittering coils, and now in bulk a man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With front of ox, while from his shaggy beard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Runnels of fountain-water spouted forth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In terror of so strange a wooer, I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was ever praying death might end my woes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before I came to such a marriage bed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then to my joy, though long delayed, the son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Zeus and of Alemena, good at need,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grappled the monster and delivered me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The circumstance and manner of that fight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot tell, not knowing; whoso watched it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Indifferent to the issue, might describe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For me⁠—I sat distracted by the dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That beauty in the end might prove my bane.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But Zeus who holds the arbitrament of war</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ordered it well, if well indeed it be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For since, his chosen bride, I shared the home</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Heracles, my cares have never ceased;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Terror on terror follows, dread on dread,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And one night’s trouble drives the last night’s out.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Children were born to us, but them he sees</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fen as the tiller of a distant field</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sees it at seedtime, sees it once again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At harvest, and no more. Such life was his</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That kept him roaming to and fro from home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To drudge for some taskmaster. And to-day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When he has overcome these many toils,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To-day I am terror-stricken most of all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For since he slew the doughty Iphitus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We have been dwelling with a stranger, here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Trachis, banished from our home, and he⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>None knoweth where he bides; but this I know,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He has gone and left me here to yearn and pine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surely some mischief has befallen him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(For since he went an age⁠—ten long, long months,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And other five⁠—has passed, and not a word),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some dread calamity, as signifies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This tablet that he left me. Oh! how oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ve prayed it prove no harbinger of woe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My lady Deianira, many a time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ve listened to thy lamentable plaints</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And groanings for the absence of thy lord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, if I seem not overbold, a slave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would lend her counsel to a free-born dame.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why, since thou art so rich in sons, not send</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One on the quest, and Hyllus most of all?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who could assist thee better, if he cares</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To ascertain the safety of his sire?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lo, I see him in the nick of time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Approaching hotfoot. Wherefore, if I seem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To speak in season, use my rede and him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My child, my boy! wise words in sooth may fall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From humble lips. This woman is a slave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But her words breathe the spirit of the free.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, mother? tell me, if it may be told.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She said that never to have gone in search</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thy long absent father brings thee shame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, but if rumour’s true, I know of him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where hast thou heard, my son, that he abides?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Last season, so they say, the whole year through</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He served as bondsman to a Lydian dame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Naught would surprise me if he sank so low.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, that disgrace is over, so I hear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where is he now reported, living or dead?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He wars, or is about to war, they say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against Euboea and King Eurytus.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Know’st thou, my son, that when he went away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He left sure oracles anent that land?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, mother? I ne’er heard of them before.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That either he should find his death, or when</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He had achieved this final task, henceforth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lead an unbroken life of peaceful ease.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Son, when his fate thus trembles in the scale,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt thou not go to aid him? If he’s saved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We too are saved; if lost, we perish too.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, mother, I’ll away; had I but known</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of this prediction I had long been gone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, as it was, his happy star forbade</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Excess of fear or doubt; but, now I know,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No pains I’ll spare to learn the perfect truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go then, my son. However late the quest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He who shall learn good news is well repaid! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Child of star-bespangled Night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Born as she dies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Laid to rest in a blaze of light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Tell me, Sun-god, O tell me, where</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Tarries the child of Alemena fair;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Thou from whose eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Keen as lightning, naught can hide.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Doth he on either mainland bide?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Roams he over the sea straits driven?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Thou, omniscient eye of heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Declare, declare!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">For like bird bereft of her mate</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">(Sad my tale)</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Deianira, desolate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">She the maiden of many wooed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Pines by fears for her lord pursued;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Ever she bodes some instant harm</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Ever she starts at a new alarm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">With vigils pale.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">For as the tireless South or Northern blast</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Billow on billow rolls o’er ocean wide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">So on the son of Cadmus follows fast</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Sea upon sea of trouble, tide on tide;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And now he sinks, now rises; still some god</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Is nigh to save him from Death’s whelming flood.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Bear with me, lady, if I seem to chide thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Why by despondency is fair hope slain?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Think that high Zeus, if evil now betide thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">No human lot ordaineth free from pain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">But as the Bear revolves in heaven all night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">So mortals move ’twixt sorrow and delight.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">The sheen of night with daybreak wanes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Pleasure follows after pains.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">If perchance to-day thou art sad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Then another man is glad.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Gains with losses alternate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Naught is constant in one state:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Ponder this, my Queen, nor let</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Carking care thy spirit fret.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Tell me hast thou ever known</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Zeus unmindful of his own?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Doubtless ye must have heard of my distress,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And therefore come; but how my heart is racked</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye cannot know⁠—pray God ye ne’er may know it</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="dl2">
									<span>By suffering!</span>
									<span>Like to us, the tender plant</span>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is reared and nurtured in some garden close;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor heat, nor rain, nor any breath of air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vexes it, but unrufiled, unperturbed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It buds and blossoms in sequestered bliss;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So fare we till the maid is called a wife</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And finds her married portion in the night⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dread terror for her husband or her child.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only the woman who by trial knows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cares of wedlock knows what I endure.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Many have been my sorrows in the past,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now of one, the woefullest of all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have to tell. When Heracles, my lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On his last travel was about to start,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He left an ancient tablet in the house,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inscribed with characters that ne’er before,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>However desperate the enterprise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He would interpret; for he aye set forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As one about to do and not to die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This time, as on his death bed, he prescribed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Due portion of his substance as my dower,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to his children severally assigned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their heritage of lands; and fixed a date,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Saying that when a year and three full moons</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had passed since he departed from his home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He needs must die, or, if he then survived,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Live ever after an untroubled life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So by the mouth of the two priestly Doves<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dodona’s sacred oak had once declared.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now, this very day, the hour has struck</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For confirmation of the prophecy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus from sweet slumber, friends, ye see me start</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With terror at the thought of widowed days,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If he, the noblest of all men, were gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hush! no ill-omened words! I see approaching</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A messenger, bay-wreathed⁠—he brings good news.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Queen Deianira, let me be the first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To rid thee of thy fears. Be well assured</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alemena’s son is living; o’er his foes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Victorious he is bringing home the spoils,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To offer firstfruits to his country’s gods.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Old man, what dost thou tell me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That anon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou shalt behold in presence, at thy gate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Illustrious, crowned with victory, thy lord.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Some stranger or a native told thee this?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The herald Lichas is proclaiming it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There in the summer pastures to the crowd.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From him I heard, and sped to be the first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bring the news and win reward and thanks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If such his news, why comes he not himself?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That were no light task; all our Malian folk</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cluster around him, hem him on all sides,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ply him with questions, one and all intent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hear his news; he cannot stir a step,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Midst willing hosts a most unwilling guest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till all their eagerness is satisfied.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But thou shalt see him face to face anon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lord of the unshorn meads of Oeta, Zeus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though long delayed, thou giv’st me joy at last.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Women within, and ye without the gates,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Uplift your voices, hail the new-born light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That dawns to glad me when all hope had fled.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i2">Maidens, let your joyous shout</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Of triumph from the hearth ring out,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Swell the choir of men who raise</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Their paean to Apollo’s praise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Sing, man and maid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Phoebus our aid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Lord of the quiver,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Strong to deliver!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Hymn his sister, maid and man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Artemis Ortygian.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Slayer of deer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">With fiery brand</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">In either hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">O goddess, hear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Hymn ye the nymphs too, her attendant band</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">My spirit spurns the ground;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Bid the shrill fife outsound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">My sovereign I obey.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Evoë!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">The thyrsus, see,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Calls me; I must away</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">To join the Bacchic rout,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">With Maenads dance and shout,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Once more the paean raise;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">For, lady, here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">In presence clear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">My joy takes shape and stands before thy gaze.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Kind friends, I see, nor have my wistful eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Failed to perceive this company’s approach⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hail to thee, herald, if indeed thou bring’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>News that will gladden me, though long delayed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</b> with Captive Women.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, lady, glad is our return and glad</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy greeting, as befits the deed achieved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He who speeds well a welcome fair deserves.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>First tell me what I first would learn, best friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall I embrace my Heracles alive?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Surely; I left him both alive and hale,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In lusty strength and sound in every limb.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where? upon Greek soil, tell me, or abroad?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Upon a headland in Euboea, where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He marks out altars to Cenaean Zeus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dedicates the fertile lands around.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In payment of some former vow, or warned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By oracles?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis for a vow he made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When he went forth to conquer and despoil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oechalia of these women whom thou see’st.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O tell me who these captives are and whose;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So piteous, to judge them by their plight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He chose them for himself and for the gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When he had sacked the town of Eurytus.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Was it to take that city he delayed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All those interminable, countless days?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not so; that time he mostly was detained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Lydia; by his own account, not free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But sold in bondage; nor shouldst thou resent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A tale of outrage, when the doer is Zeus.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus he fulfilled (these were his very words)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A year of servitude to Omphalè,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The barbarous queen. So grievous was the sting</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of his reproach, that by a mighty oath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He swore one day to enslave with wife and child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The author of this foul calamity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor vain that vow. No sooner was he purged,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than he enlisted straight an alien host,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And marched against the city of Eurytus;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Eurytus alone of men he deemed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The guilty cause, who when he came a guest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To one by ties of ancient friendship bound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With many a bitter taunt and bitter spite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assailed him, saying, “Thou indeed hast shafts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unerring, yet in feats of archery</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My sons surpass thee,” or again he’d cry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Out on thee, slave, a freeman’s down-trod thrall.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once at a banquet too he cast him forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When he was in his cups. Whereat incensed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Encountering Iphitus upon the hill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Tiryns in pursuit of his strayed mares,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the youth stood at gaze, his wits afield,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He hurled him from the craggy battlements.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That deed of violence provoked our King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sire of all, Olympian Zeus, who drave him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forth to be sold, and spared him not, because</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That once (his sole offence) he slew a foe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By treachery; had he slain him in fair fight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Zeus had approved his righteous wrath, for gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No more than men can suffer insolence.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So all those braggarts of outrageous tongue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lie low in Hades and their town’s enslaved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And these, the women whom thou seeest, fallen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To abject misery from their high estate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are to thy hands delivered. Thus my lord</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Charged me, and I, his liegeman true, obey.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Doubt not himself, so soon as he has paid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Due sacrifices for his victory</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Zeus his sire, will presently be here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This crowns and consummates my happy tale.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Now, lady, is thy joy assured, in part</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Present, with promise sure for what remains.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hearing these happy tidings of my lord</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How can I but rejoice, as it is meet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For our two fortunes run in parallels.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet one who thinks on change and chance must dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lest such success be prelude to a fall.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And a strange pity hath come o’er me, friends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At sight of these poor wretches, motherless,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fatherless, homeless, in an alien land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daughters, it well may be, of free-born sires,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now condemned to live the life of slaves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never, O Zeus who turn’st the tide of war,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never may I behold a child of mine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus visited, or if such lot must be,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May it not fall while Deianira lives.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such dread, as I behold these maids, is mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To Iolè.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, who art thou, most miserable girl,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mother or maid? To judge thee by thy looks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hast full warrant of virginity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea and of high birth. Lichas, who is she?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who was her father, and her mother? Speak.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her most of all I pity, for she shows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone the sense of her calamity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How should I know? Why question me? Perchance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She was of noblest lineage in that land.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, of their kings? Had Eurytus a daughter?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not, did not question her at length.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did’st thou not even learn her name from one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of her companions?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, I had my work</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To do, and had no time for questioning.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then speak to <em>me</em> and tell me who thou art,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Poor maid; it grieves me truly not to know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, if she opens now her lips, ’twill be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unlike her former self, for hitherto</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She hath not uttered word or syllable;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But still in travail with her heavy grief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She weeps and stays not weeping since she left</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her wind-swept home. ’Tis sad and ill for her,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This melancholy, yet ’tis natural.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Leave her in peace and let her pass within,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is her humour. Heaven forbid that I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should add another to her present pains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enough God knows. Now let us all go in,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou may’st start at once upon thy way.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I make all things ready in the house. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</b> and Captives.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So be it, but first tarry here awhile</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou may’st learn in private who are these</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom thou dost welcome ’neath thy roof, and hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Matters of import still untold, whereof</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have full cognisance.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What meanest thou?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why dost thou bid me pause and stay my steps?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Stay them and listen. As my former news</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was worth the hearing, so methinks is this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, shall I call the others back to hear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or wouldst thou speak with me and these alone?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With thee and these; the rest are well away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>See, they are gone; proceed then with thy tale.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yon fellow spake not the straightforward truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In aught he told thee; either now he’s false,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or else before was no true messenger.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How say’st thou? Tell me clearly all thy mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These covert hints I cannot understand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas for this maiden’s sake (I heard the man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And many witnesses were by, declare it)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Heracles laid prostrate in the dust</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oechalia’s battlements and Eurytus.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Love was his leader, love alone inspired</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This doughty deed, not his base servitude</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As bondsman under Lydian Omphalè,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor ruth for Iphitus hurled headlong down,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As Lichas feigned, who shrank to tell of love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So, when he failed to win her sire’s consent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give the maiden for his paramour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Picking some petty cause of quarrel, he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Made war upon her land (the land in which</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eurytus, as the herald said, was King)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And slew the prince her sire and sacked the town.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, as thou see’st, he comes and sends before him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The maiden, with set purpose, to his house,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not as a slave⁠—how could he so intend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seeing his heart is kindled with love’s fire?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So I determined, Queen, to tell thee all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I had heard from Lichas; many heard it too</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who stood with me in the Trachinian throng,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And can convict him. If my words give pain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It grieves me, but, alas, they are too true.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me unhappy! in what plight I stand!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What bane have I received beneath my roof,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unwitting, for my ruin! Is she then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A nameless maid, as he who brought her sware?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, she hath name and fame, a princess born,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Iolè, daughter of King Eurytus;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This girl whose parents Lichas could not tell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because, forsooth, he had not questioned her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A curse on evil doers, most on him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who by deceit worketh iniquity!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My friends, what shall I do? this latest news</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bewilders me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go in and question Lichas;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perchance, if pressed, he’ll tell thee all the truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There’s reason in thy counsel; I will go.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And I⁠—shall I remain, or what would’st thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I should do?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Remain, for here he comes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without my summons, of his own accord.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lady, what message shall I bear my lord?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Instruct me; I am starting, as thou see’st.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou cam’st at leisure, but dost part in haste,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hast no time for further talk with me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou wouldst question me, I wait thy pleasure.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, dost thou reverence the honest truth?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So help me Zeus, I’ll speak what truth I know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who is this woman then whom thou hast brought?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Euboean; of her parents I know naught.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hark, sirrah, look me in the face: dost know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To whom thou speakest?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who art thou to ask me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Be pleased to answer, if thou hast the wit.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To my most gracious mistress whom I serve,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daughter of Oeneus, spouse of Heracles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deianira, if I be not blind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My question’s answered to the point. Thou sayest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She is thy sovereign.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whom I am bound to serve.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then tell me what should be thy punishment,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If in thy duty thou art proved to fail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fail in my duty? What dark riddle is this?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My words are plain, the riddling speech is thine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I go; I was a fool to stay for thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Depart, but answer one brief question first.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ask what thou wilt; thou hast a wagging tongue.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That captive whom thou broughtest here⁠—thou know’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The maid I mean?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know, and what of her?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Said’st thou not she thou scarce dost know by sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was Iolè, the child of Eurytus?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To whom and when? What witness canst thou bring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To vouch for hearing such a tale from me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Scores of our townsfolk⁠—all the multitude</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That heard thee mid the great Trachinian throng.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They may have said so, but the vulgar bruit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mere surmise is not strict evidence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>“Surmise,” quotha! Did’st thou not say on oath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“I am bringing home a bride for Heracles”?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>“Bringing a bride?” Dear lady, tell me, pray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who is this stranger?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One who heard thy tale</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How a whole city fell for love of her,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That ’twas the passion kindled by her eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not the Lydian queen who sacked the town.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Send him away, good lady; ’tis not wise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bandy folly with a brain-sick fool.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, by the god, I pray, who hurls his bolts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On Oeta’s wooded heights, hold nothing back;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To no ungenerous woman wilt thou speak,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But one that knows the inconstancy of men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who e’en in joys delight not in one kind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gamester who would pit himself ’gainst Love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is ill advised. Love rules at will the gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And me⁠—why not then others weak as I?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So were I mad indeed either to blame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My husband stricken with love’s malady,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or her the partner of his dalliance:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That brings to them no shame or wrong to me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have more sense. But if he taught thee thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To lie, the lesson thou hast learnt is base;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or if thy fraud is self-taught, thou art like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To prove most cruel, meaning to be kind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, tell me the whole truth. The name of liar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is to the free-born man a deadly brand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And think not that thy lying will not out,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For many heard thy tale and will inform me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art thou afraid of me? Thy fears are vain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twould vex me much not to be told the truth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To know it hurts not. Hath not Heracles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had loves before (no mortal more than he)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And no one of them ever had harsh word</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or taunt from me; nor shall this maid, howe’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She dotes, consumed with passion, on my lord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, my heart bled for pity seeing her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose beauty was her bane; poor innocent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who brought to wrack and bondage her own land.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All that is past and over, let it sail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Adown the stream of time. But O, be thou,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whate’er thou art to others, true to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Heed her, she counsels well, and thou shalt win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her commendation soon, and thanks from me</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, then, dear mistress, since I see thou hast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A human feeling for the infirmities</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of poor humanity, I will tell thee all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Frankly and fully. ’Tis as this man saith;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The overmastering passion that inspired</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul of Heracles was for this maid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for her sake he sacked Oechalia,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her desolate home. This much in his defence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I needs must add, he ne’er himself denied</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor bade me hide it from thee. It was I,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fearing to wound thee, lady, I who sinned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If such concealment should be deemed a sin.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, lady, that thou know’st the tale in full,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For both your sakes⁠—thine own no less than his⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suffer this maiden gladly, and abide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By the kind words thou spak’st concerning her.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For he who never yielded to a foe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By her was vanquished and by love laid low.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This way my thoughts too, as thou bidst, inclined,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor will I fondly aggravate my trouble</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By warring against Heaven. Let us indoors,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou may’st bear a message to my lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, as a fit return for gifts received,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My gift withal. It were not meet that thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should’st leave me empty-handed, having come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accompanied by such a goodly train. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Many a trophy of war the Cyprian bears away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tell of the triumphs she wins o’er gods I may not stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How the Olympian King and the Lord of the realms of night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and the Shaker of Earth, Poseidon, owns her might.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fitter theme for my song the well-matched champion pair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rivals who entered the lists to win the hand of the fair.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dread the strife, and the sky with dust of battle was full.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>One was a river-god, four-footed and horned like a bull,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oeneadae was his home and Achelous his name;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But from Thebè, beloved of Bacchus, the other came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With bow and with brandished club and javelins twain at his side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Child of Zeus. So they met and fought for a winsome bride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But with her umpire wand the Cyprian Queen was there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Goddess who rules the fight and assigns the hand of the fair.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Hark! the thud of fisted blow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Crash of horns and twanging bow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Grapplings close-entwined, and now</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Buttings of the hornèd brow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And amid the storm, in tones</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Faint and muffled, deep-drawn groans.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">But afar upon the sward</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Sat the tender tearful maid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">While in doubt the battle swayed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Musing who should be her lord.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Long she sat and wept forlorn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Then, like heifer driven to stray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Weanèd, from her dam away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Sudden from her home was torn.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Friends, while our herald guest is in the house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Conversing with the captives, ere he leaves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have stolen forth to speak with you alone;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Partly to tell you what my hands have wrought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to command your sympathy. This maid⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No maiden she but mistress now, methinks⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have harboured (as some merchant takes on board</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An over-freight) to wreck my peace of mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now we twain must share a common couch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To one lord wedded. Such the recompense</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Heracles, whom I was wont to extol</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As model of all virtue, makes me now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all my faithful service as a wife.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet to be wroth with one like him, infect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With this love-plague, I cannot bring myself;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But then to share his bed and board with her⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What wife could bear it? She’s the budding rose,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I o’erblown and withering on the thorn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men cull the flower and when the bloom has fled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fling it far from them. This then is my fear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Heracles will leave me the bare name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of consort, while the younger is his wife.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, as I said, ’tis folly to be wroth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have a better way to ease my pain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A remedy that I will now reveal.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stored in an urn of brass I long have kept</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A keepsake of the old-world monster; this</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shaggy-breasted Nessus gave to me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While yet a girl, and from his wounded side</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I took it as he lay at point of death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nessus who ferried wayfarers for hire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Across the deep Evenus in his arms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without the help of oar or sail. I too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When first I went with Heracles, a bride</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assigned him by my sire, I too was borne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On his broad shoulders, and in mid-stream he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Touched me with wanton hands. I shrieked aloud,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He turned, the son of Zeus, and straight let fly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A winged shaft that, whizzing in the air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pierced to the lungs. Faint with approaching death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Centaur spake: “Daughter of Oeneus old,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This profit of my ferrying at least,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As last of all I’ve ferried, shall be thine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If thou wilt heed me. Gather with thy hands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The clotted gore that curdles round my wound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just where the Hydra, Lerna’s monstrous breed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Has tinged the barbed arrow with her gall.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus shalt thou have a charm to bind the heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Heracles, and never shall he look</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On wife or maid to love her more than thee.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So I bethought me of this philtre, friends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which since the Centaur’s death I had preserved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Locked in a secret place, and I have smeared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This robe as he directed while he lived.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My work is now accomplished. Far from me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be thought of evil witch-craft or desire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To learn it; wives who try such arts I hate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But how by love-charms I may win again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My Heracles and wean him from this maid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This I have planned⁠—unless indeed I seem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’erwanton; if ye think so, I desist.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou hast warranty thy charm will work,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We think that thou hast counselled not amiss.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No warrant, for I have not tried it yet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But of its potency I am assured.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Without experiment there cannot be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assurance, howsoever firm thy faith.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, we shall know ere long, for there I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lichas just starting; he is at the gate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only do you be secret; e’en dark deeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If they be done in darkness bring no blame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What are thy orders, child of Oeneus, say;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Already I have tarried over long.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whilst thou wert talking with the maids within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have been busied, Lichas, with thy charge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This robe; ’twas woven by my hands, a gift</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou must carry to my absent lord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Instruct him straitly, when thou givest it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he, and none before him, put it on;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And let no sunlight, nor the altar flame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold it, nor the fire upon his hearth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till he stand forth in sight of all arrayed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For gods to see it, at some solemn feast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I had vowed, if ever I should see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or hear for certain of his safe return,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To invest him in this newly-woven robe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so present him duly to the gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A votary for the sacrifice new-dight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And as a token point him out this seal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The impress of my signet-ring, that he</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="dl2">
									<span>Will surely recognise.</span>
									<span>Now go thy way,</span>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And heed the rule of messengers, nor let</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy zeal outrun thy orders, but so act</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou may’st win a double meed of thanks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For service rendered both to him and me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Call me no master of the mystery</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Hermes, if in ought I trip or fail⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deliver not this casket as it is,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And add in attestation of the gift</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy very words.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou may’st be going now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How things are in the house thou know’st full well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know, and will report all safe and sound.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And thou canst tell him of the captive maid⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How kindly I received and welcomed her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, I was filled with wonder and delight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What further message have I? None, I fear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tell him of my longing were too soon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before I know that he too longs for me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lichas</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Ye who on Oeta dwell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Or where the hot springs well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And down the cliffs their steaming waters pour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Or by the inmost shore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Malis, where the golden-arrowed Maid</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Haunts the green glade,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where at thy Gates, far-famed from times of old,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Greeks counsel hold;</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Soon shall the clear-voiced flute</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Sweet as Apollo’s lute,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Echo amid your hills and vales again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">No sad funereal strain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But hymeneals meet for gods to hear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">For now he draweth near,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Zeus-born conqueror, Alemena’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">His victory won.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Him twelve weary months we wait.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Wondering what may be his fate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And his true wife wastes away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Pining at her lord’s delay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">But the War-god, with his foes</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Wroth, has given at last repose.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Spread the sail and ply the oar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Waft him, breezes, from the shore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Where to Zeus, his vows all paid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Sacrifices he hath made.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">May the magic mantle fire</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">All his heart with fond desire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Speed him to his true love’s arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Captive to her subtle charms.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Maidens, I fear I have been over bold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ill advised in all I did of late.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What mean’st thou, Deianira, Oeneus’ child.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not, but I tremble lest deceived</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By fond hopes I have wrought a grievous harm.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou speak’st not of thy gift to Heracles?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis so; and I would henceforth counsel none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To act in haste, unless the issue’s clear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell, if thou may’st, the cause of thy alarm.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My friends, a thing has come to pass, so strange</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That, if I tell it, you will deem you hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A miracle. The flock of wool wherewith</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en now I smeared the festal robe (’twas plucked</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From a white fleece) has disappeared, untouched</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By aught within the house, but self-consumed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It wasted, melting on the flags, away.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But all that chanced I will relate in full.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The precepts given me by the Centaur-beast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What time the barb was rankling in his side,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fixed in my memory, like some ordinance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Graven on brass indelible, I kept.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All that he then commanded me I did:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He bade me hide in some dark nook the salve,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remote from firelight and the sun’s hot ray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till I had need to use it, freshly smeared.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so I did, and, when the occasion rose,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I took a tuft of wool that I had plucked</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From one of our home flock; therewith I spread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The unguent in my chamber privily;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then folded and within its coffer laid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Safe from the sunlight, as ye saw, my gift.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But as I passed indoors behold a sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Portentous, well nigh inconceivable.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It chanced that I had thrown the hank of wool</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Used for the smearing into the full blaze</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of sunlight; with the gradual warmth dissolved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It shrank and shrivelled up till naught was left</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save a fine powder, likest to the dust</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That strews the ground when sawyers are at work⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mere dust and ashes. But from out the spot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where lay the strewments clotted froth upwelled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when the spilth of Bacchus, from the grapes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>New pressed and purple, on the ground is poured.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus I for trouble know not where to turn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And only see a fearful thing I have done.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why should the dying Centaur then have shown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Regard for me, the author of his death?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Impossible! no, he was cozening me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sought, through me, his slayer to undo.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Too late, too late, when knowledge naught avails,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My eyes are opened. I alone am doomed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(Unless my fears prove false) to slay my lord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know the shaft that slew the Centaur scathed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en Cheiron, though a god, and any beast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It touches dies. So the black venomed gore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That from the wound of Nessus oozed must slay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Likewise my lord. Thus I, alas, must think.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Howbeit I am resolved, if fall he must,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The selfsame stroke of fate shall end my days.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What woman noble born would dare live on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dishonoured when her fair repute is gone?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis true dread perils threaten; yet ’twere well</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To cherish hope till the event be known.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They who have counselled ill cannot admit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One ray of hope to fortify their soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Men will not look severely on an act</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unwittingly committed, as was thine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With a good conscience one might urge this plea</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which ill becomes a partner in the crime.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twere better to refrain from further speech,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless thou wouldst address thy son; for he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who went to seek his father is at hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mother, I would that of three wishes one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were granted me⁠—that thou wert lying dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, if alive, no mother wert of mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or that thy nature might be wholly changed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What dost thou so abhor in me, my son?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Woman, I tell thee thou hast done to death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy husband, yea my sire, this very day.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! what word hath passed thy lips, my son?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A word that of fulfilment shall not fail;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For what is done no mortal can undo.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What say’st thou, son? What warranty is thine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To charge me with a deed so terrible?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The evidence of my eyes; myself I saw</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My father’s anguish; ’tis no hearsay charge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where didst thou find him? wast thou by his side?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As thou must hear it, I must tell thee all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He had sacked the famous town of Eurytus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thence returning rich with spoils of war,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had reached a sea-washed promontory, named</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cenaeum, where Euboea fronts the north.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There I first met him as he marked the bounds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of altars and a sacred grove to Zeus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His father. At the sight my heart was glad.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He stood addressed to offer sacrifice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A lordly hecatomb, when Lichas came,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His own familiar herald, bringing him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy gift, the fatal robe; he put it on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>According to thy precept; then began</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His sacrifice with twice six faultless bulls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The firstfruits of the booty; but in all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A hundred victims at the altar bled.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At first, poor wretch, with joyous air serene,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Proud of the glory of his robe, he prayed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But when the blood-red flame began to blaze</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the high altars and the resinous pine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A sweat broke out upon him; and the coat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stuck to his side, and clung to every limb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Glued, as it were, by some skilled artisan.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A pricking pain began to rack his bones.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Soon the fell venom of the hydra dire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Worked inward and devoured him. Thereupon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He called for Lichas, who, poor witless wretch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had in thy guilt no part or lot, demanding</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who hatched the plot and why he had brought the robe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The youth unwitting said it was thy gift,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine only, and delivered as ’twas sent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While yet he listened a convulsive spasm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shot through his lungs. He caught him by the foot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just at the ankle joint, and hurled him full</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against a rock out-jutting from the foam:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His skull was crushed to fragments, and his hair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bedaubed with blood and flecked with scattered brains.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A cry of horror from the crowd arose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At sight of one distraught and one struck dead;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And no man dared to face him, for the pain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now dragged him down, now made him leap in air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While with his yells and screams the rocks resound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From Locrian headlands to Euboean capes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But when his agony had spent itself⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now writhing prone, now making loud lament,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With curses on his marriage bed and thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bride he won from Oeneus for his bane⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From out the cloud of smoke that compassed him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He wildly gazed and spied me in the throng</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Weeping, and fixed his eye on me and spake:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Come hither, boy, shun not my misery,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en if my son must share his father’s death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But bear me hence and set me, if thou wilt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where none shall see me more, no matter where;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or if thou hast no heart for this, at least</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ferry me quickly hence, lest here I die.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So he enjoined. We laid him on the deck</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In torment, groaning loud; and presently</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye shall behold him living or just dead.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Such, mother, is the evil ’gainst my sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou hast planned and wrought. Thy guilt is plain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May Vengeance and the Erinys visit thee!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So pray I, if ’tis right, and right it is,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I have seen thee trample on the right,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slaying the noblest man who ever lived,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose peer thou never shalt behold again. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Deianira</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why dost thou steal away thus silently?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such silence sure is eloquent of guilt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let her depart and speed before the gale</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of my sight. Why should the empty name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mother henceforth swell her vanity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who in her deeds shows naught of motherhood?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let her depart in peace, and may she share</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Herself the happiness she brings my sire!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Lo, maidens, in our eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Fulfilled this day</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The word inspired of ancient prophecies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Did not the god’s voice say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The twelfth year, when its tale of months is run,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Shall end his toils for Zeus’s true-born son?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">That promise doth not fail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">’Tis wafted on the gale.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Can he when once the light of life has fled</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Be subject still to bondage ’mongst the dead?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">And if the mists of death enfold him now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">If the doom grips his heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Wrought by the Centaur’s art;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">How racked by venom bred</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Of Death, on asp’s blood fed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">How in the clutches of the Hydra, how</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Can he survive to see to-morrow’s sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">When through each vein doth run</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The leprous bane prepared</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">By the fell beast, black-haired</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Nessus, his life to drain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And vex him with tumultuous pain?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Of this our ill-starred queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">All innocent, knew naught:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Only the curse to void, I ween,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Of a new bride she sought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Witless a stranger’s remedy she used.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">How was her fond simplicity abused!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Too late her error doth she rue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">And pearly tears her eyes bedew:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Awe-stricken we await</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The swoop of instant fate.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i4">Our pent up tears outflow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Ye gods! did e’er such blow</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">From his worst foes afflict our King before</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">As this fell plague? O bloodstained spear that bore</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">From proud Oechalia’s height</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Stormed by the hero’s might,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">A vanished bride, how clear</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The Cyprian’s wiles appear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Unseen, thy spear she steeled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">And now she stands revealed.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Semi-Chorus 1</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Listen! I seem to hear⁠—or do I dream?⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A cry of sorrow pealing through the house.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heard you it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Semi-Chorus 2</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, a despairing wail rings out within,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Distinct; the house has suffered something strange.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mark ye that aged crone!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With what a cloud upon her puckered brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She comes to bring us news of grave import!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</b> from the house.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My daughters, what a crop of miseries</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We are reaping from that gift to Heracles!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What new misfortune, mother, hast to tell?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Deianira has departed hence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On her last journey, yet not stirred a step.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou canst not mean she is dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My tale is told.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Poor lady, dead?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I say it once again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas, poor wretch! How came she by her end?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O ’twas a gruesome deed!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say woman, how?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By her own hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What rage, what fit of madness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whetted the felon blade, how compassed she</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This death on death, herself alone the cause?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By the stroke of a dolorous sword.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Saw’st thou the horror, beldam?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I saw it; I was standing at her side.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Saw what? what did she? speak!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Herself upon herself she did the deed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What dost thou say?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Plain truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Verily this new bride</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath borne, as the fruit of her womb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A curse, a curse to the house.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Too true; and had you been at hand to see,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pity of it would have touched you more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Could woman’s hand perform so bold a deed!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas passing strange, but when ye hear the tale</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="dl2">
									<span>Ye’ll bear me out.</span>
									<span>She went indoors alone,</span>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in the court she came upon her son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Preparing a deep litter wherewithal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bear his sire back. Seeing him she fled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, crouching by the altar out of sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She groaned aloud, “O altars desolate!”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then each familiar chattel in the house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She fingered tenderly, poor wretch, and wept.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then roaming through the palace, up and down,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As one or other of her maids she met,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She gazed upon her long and wept again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bewailing her own fortunes and the house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Henceforth condemned to serve an alien lord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then she was silent, and I saw her speed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within the bed chamber of Heracles.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I from a coign of spial, unobserved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Watched, and I saw her snatch a coverpane</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fling it on the bed of Heracles.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That done, she leapt upon it, sat her down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And loosed the floodgate of hot tears and spake:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“O bridal bed and chamber, fare ye well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A long farewell; never again shall ye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lap me to slumber in your soft embrace!”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That was her last word; with a sudden wrench</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She tore the gold-wrought brooch above her breast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And laid her left arm and her side all bare.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I ran at once, as fast as age allowed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In haste to warn the son of her intent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alack! between my going and return,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In that brief space, she had driven a two-edged sword</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Home through the midriff to the very heart.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>He saw and shrieked heart-stricken at the sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Knowing his wrath had goaded her to death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all too late from those about the queen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He learned that she in utter innocence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had done according to the Centaur’s word.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since then, poor boy, his misery has no end:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He mourned for her with sighs and sobs and groans,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He kissed her lips, he clasped her in his arms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And prone beside her railed against himself:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“By my foul slander have I stricken her,”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He cried, “and now am I bereaved of both,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of father and of mother, in one day.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So fares it with us. And if any man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Counts on the morrow, or on morrows more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He reckons rashly. Morrow is there none,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until to-day its course has safely run.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Which first of woes, which next,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Wherewith my soul is vext,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">To wail, I am perplext,</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">One here accomplishèd,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">One hanging o’er my head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">One as the other dread.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>O that a gale might suddenly upspring</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">To waft me out of sight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest when the Zeus-born hero home they bring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">I die of panic fright.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>E’en now, they say, in pains no leech can quell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Home is he borne, O piteous spectacle!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Ah, not far off, but nigh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The woe that stirred my cry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A boding wail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As of some shrill-voiced nightingale.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Lo a foreign train appear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And they move with muffled tread,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Mute as bearers of a bier.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Is it sleep, or is he dead?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</b>, an <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>, and Attendants bearing <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</b> on a litter.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Ah woe is me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Woe, father, woe for thee!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Alack! I am undone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Help know I none.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Hush, son, lest thou awake</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">The intolerable ache.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">He lives, though nigh to death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Hold hard thy breath.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">What, is he still alive?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Hush, hush, lest thou revive</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">And waken from its fitful rest</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">The plague that racks his breast.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Beneath this weight of misery</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">My spirit sinks; it maddens me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">O Zeus, where am I? who</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">These strangers standing by,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">As tortured here I lie?</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Ah me! the foul fiend gnaws anew.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Did I not bid thee keep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Silence, nor scare the sleep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That over eyes and head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Awhile like balm was spread?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, how can I refrain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At sight of such grim pain?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<p>
									<span>O altar on Cenaean height,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How ill dost thou requite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sacrifice and offerings!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Zeus, thy worship ruin brings.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accursed headland, would that ne’er</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My eyes had seen thine altar-stair!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So had I ’scaped this frenzied rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No incantation can assuage.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is the charmer, where the leech,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose art a remedy could teach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save Zeus alone? If one could tell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of such a wizard, ’twere a miracle.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>O leave me, let me lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In my last agony!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Ye touch me? have a care!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would turn me? O forbear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To agony ye wake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The slumbering ache.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once more it has me in its grip, the fiend comes on apace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Greeks, if ye be Greeks indeed, most faithless of your race!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you I laboured hugely and spent myself, to free</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your land from ravening beasts of prey and monsters of the sea;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now in long drawn agony ye leave me to expire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will none of you deliver me with sword or kindly fire?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Would God that I were dead!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Will no man sever at a stroke this head?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>O help me, son of Heracles, for I am all too frail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To ease him; if thou lend thine aid, perchance we may prevail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>That will I, but nor thou nor I can rid him of the pain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That haunts him to the very end Such doom the gods ordain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 3</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>My son, where art thou? Raise me, hold me here, here!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Ah me! once more the pest doth leap</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon me and its fangs bite deep.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Pallas! ’tis torture. O for pity save</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy father; son, unsheath an innocent glaive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pierce thy sire’s heart and so the wild pain cure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That from thine impious mother I endure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>aaaThus may I see her die, like mine her end!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Brother of Zeus, kind Death, be now my friend;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lay me to rest and swift deliverance send.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I shudder, friends, to hear this woeful plaint.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How great a hero, and how ill bestead!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Many and grievous, not in name alone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The toils and burdens of these hands, these loins.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet trial like to this was never set me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By Heaven’s Queen or grim Eurystheus’ hate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such as the child of Oeneus, false and fair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath fastened on my back, this hellish net</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She wove to snare me, in whose coils I die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It hugs me close, it eats into my flesh,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It sucks the channels of my breath, hath drained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My life-blood, and my whole frame wastes and withers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fast locked in these unutterable bonds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And this my fall no warrior’s lance hath wrought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor Giant’s earth-born brood, nor savage beast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor Grecian nor barbarian, nor the lands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whither I fared to rid them of their pests;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, but a woman, weak as all her sex,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath quelled me, single-handed and unarmed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Son, show thyself thy father’s son in deed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine, not thy mother’s⁠—mother in name alone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hale her thyself, hand her thyself to me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wretch, that when she meets her righteous doom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I may make trial which sight moves thee more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mother’s or a father’s agony.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For pity’s sake shrink not; to see me thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(’Twould move to pity e’en a heart of stone)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Puling and weeping like a girl, unmanned.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So none can boast to have seen me, for till now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I took whate’er befell me with a smile.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now⁠—’tis I who play the woman now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come closer, stand beside me; see, my son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To what a pass ill fate hath brought thy sire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo, I will lift the veil; look all of you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On this poor maimèd body, and declare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was ever wretch so piteous as I.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ah me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again the deadly spasm; it shoots and burns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through all my vitals. Will it never end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This struggle with the never-dying worm?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lord of the Dead, receive me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Smite me, O fire of Zeus!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hurl, Father, on my head thy crashing bolt!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again it burgeons, blossoms, blazes forth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="dl2">
									<span>The all-consuming plague.</span>
									<span>O hands, my hands,</span>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Arms, breast and shoulders, once all puissant,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are ye the same whose thews of old subdued</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The scourge of herdsmen in his savage lair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Nemean lion, a beast untamable;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slew the Lenaean hydra; overcame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That twy-form multitude, half man, half horse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rude, lawless, savage, unapproachable,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unmatched in might; and the Erymanthian boar;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tamed in the nether world the monstrous whelp</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of dread Echidna, the three-headed hound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Hades, and the dragon-guard who watched</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden apples at the world’s far end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These were my toils, and others manifold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And none could ever boast of my defeat.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now out of joint, a thing of shreds I lie</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Baffled by hands invisible, I who claim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mother of the noblest, and for sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ruler of the starry heavens, Zeus.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But of one thing be sure, though I am naught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cannot stir a step, yet even thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am a match for her who wrought my woe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let her but come that she may learn of me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This lesson to repeat to all, that I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Living and dying chastened all that’s vile.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O hapless Greece, what mourning will be thine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If thou must lose thy mightiest warrior?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O father, since thy silence seems to invite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An answer, hear me, stricken though thou art.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I shall but ask what’s fair; O be again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy true self, not by pain and rage distraught;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Else wilt thou never learn how vain thy thirst</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For vengeance, how unjust thy bitterness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say what thou wilt and end; I am too sick</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To catch the drift of all thy riddling words.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis of my mother I would tell thee⁠—how</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She fares, and how unwittingly she sinned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O shameless reprobate, thou dar’st to name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy father’s murderess, name her too to me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Her case is such that silence were unmeet.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Unmeet in truth, because of her past crimes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And of her deeds this day, as thou wilt own.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak, but I fear thy speech will prove thee base.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hear then. She is dead, slain but an hour agone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By whom? this portent likes me not; ’tis strange.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By her own hand, none other, was she slain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Out on her! she hath baulked my just revenge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>E’en thou wouldst soften if thou knewest all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A wondrous prologue! make thy meaning plain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The sum is this: she erred with good intent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>“Good,” say’st thou, wretch? Was it good to slay thy sire?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, when she saw thy new bride, she devised</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A charm to win thee back, but was misled.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Could Trachis boast a wizard of such might?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The Centaur Nessus taught her long ago</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How to enkindle in thy heart love’s flame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas, alas! I am undone, undone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The light of day has left me; now I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In what extremity of fate I stand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, son, thy father is no more; go summon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy brethren one and all, go summon too</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alemena, bride of Zeus⁠—an empty name⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That from my dying lips ye all may learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What oracles I know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot call</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy mother; she at Tiryns by the sea</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far hence abides; and of thy children some</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She took to live with her; others at Thebes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As thou may’st learn, are lodged; but all of us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here present, father, will obey thy hest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then listen thou and heed me. Now’s the hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To prove thy breed⁠—if thou art rightly called</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My son. It was foreshown me by my sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I should perish by no living wight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But by a dweller in the realms of Death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So by this Centaur beast, as was foretold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I perish, I the living by the dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A later oracle, as thou shalt learn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Meets and confirms the ancient prophecy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas in the grove whose priests, the Selli, make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The earth their bed, rude hillsmen, that I heard it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Breathed by my Father’s oak of many tongues;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heard it, and wrote it down, my present doom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now at this living moment brought to pass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Release it promised from my toils, and I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Augured a happy life, but it meant death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For with the dead there can be no more toil.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since, then, my weird thus plainly comes to pass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou, son, must do thy part and lend thine aid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Delay not till I goad thee in my wrath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But aid me with a will as one who knows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden rule, a father to obey.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, father, though the issue gives me pause</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I misdoubt thy purport, I’ll obey.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well said, but first lay thy right hand in mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wherefore impose on me this needless pledge?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy hand at once; obey and argue not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here is my hand; I do as I am bid.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Now by the head of Zeus my Father swear,</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What wouldst thou have me swear? May I not know?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Swear to perform the task that I enjoin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will and take the oath, so help me Zeus,</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And add thereto the curse on perjurers.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No need, for I shall keep it; yet I will.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou know’st the peak of Oeta, shrine of Zeus?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, I have climbed it oft to sacrifice.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thither thyself, thou with what friends thou wilt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must carry me. From the deep-rooted oak</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lop many a branch, and many a faggot hew</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the wild-olive’s lusty stock, and lay me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the pyre. Kindle a torch of pine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fire it. Not a tear or wail or moan!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unweeping, unlamenting must thou do</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy part and prove thou art indeed my son.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fail, and my ghost shall haunt thee ever more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O father, canst thou mean it? Hear I right?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou hast thy charge. If thou refuse it, get</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another sire, be called no more my son.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O woe isme! What dost thou ask, that I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should be thy murderer, a parricide?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not so, but healer of my sufferings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The one physician that can cure my pains.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How can I heal thy stricken frame by fire?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, if thou shrink from this, perform the rest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The task of bearing thee I will not grudge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nor yet to heap the pyre, as I have bid?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So that I light it not with my own hands;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All else I will perform and do my part.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That will suffice. But add one other boon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A little one, to crown the great ones given.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It shall be granted, be it ne’er so great.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou know’st the maiden, child of Eurytus?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Methinks thou meanest Iolè.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>None else.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is my charge to thee concerning her.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When I am dead, if thou wouldst keep the oath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou sworest to obey thy father’s will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take her to wife, let not another have her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who by my side hath lain; but thine, my son⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine let her be, joined in the marriage bond.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Much hast thou granted, to refuse one more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One little boon, would cancel all the score.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! ’tis ill to quarrel with one sick⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But who could bear to see him in this mind?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy murmuring augurs disobedience;</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What her, the sole cause of my mother’s death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And worse, the cause of this thy grievous plight!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who, were he not possessed of fiends, would do it?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Better, my father, I with thee should die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than live united with our direst foe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The boy, it seems, is not inclined to heed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A father’s dying prayer; but heaven’s curse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Awaits full sure a disobedient son.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I fear thy frenzy soon will show itself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, for thou wakenest my pain that slept.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O what a coil of dread perplexities!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Because thou wilt not deign to heed thy sire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, must I learn impiety from thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis piety to glad a father’s heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have thy warrant then for what I do?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I call the gods to witness it is just.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then I consent and hesitate no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let heaven attest this act of thine, for I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cannot be blamed for filial piety.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou endest well. Now crown thy gracious words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With action; haste and lay me on the pyre</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before the spasms and fever-fit return.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To Attendants.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ho, haste and lift me. Thus I find repose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The end and consummation of my woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Since, father, this thou straitly dost command,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Naught hinders the fulfilment of thy will.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Heracles</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Rouse, arm thyself, O stubborn heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Before again the plague upstart;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Set on thy lips a curb of steel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Thy mouth let stony silence seal;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Go meet thy doom without a cry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">A victim, happy thus to die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hyllus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Lift him, men, nor take amiss</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">That I bear a part in this.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">We are blameless, but confess</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">That the gods are pitiless.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Children they beget, and claim</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Worship in a father’s name,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Yet with apathetic eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Look upon such agony.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">What is yet to be none knows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">But the present’s fraught with woes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Woes for us, for them deep shame;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">And of all beneath the sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Worse than he hath suffered none.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Come, maidens, come away!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Horrors have ye seen this day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Dire death and direr fall:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">And Zeus hath wrought it all. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt omnes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
